Add OTel Operator auto-instrumentation troubleshooting page (#4724)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/kubernetes/operator/troubleshooting/automatic.md

---
title: Auto-instrumentation
---

If you're using the [OpenTelemetry Operator](/docs/kubernetes/operator)'s
capability to inject [auto-instrumentation](/docs/kubernetes/operator/automatic)
and you're not seeing any traces or metrics, follow these
troubleshooting steps to understand what’s going on.

## Troubleshooting steps

### Check installation status

> After installing the `Instrumentation` resource, make sure that it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After installing the `Instrumentation` resource, make sure that it is
```

               ghcr.io/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/autoinstrumentation-java:1.26.0
             instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/default-auto-instrumentation-nodejs-image:
               ghcr.io/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/autoinstrumentation-nodejs:0.40.0
             instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/default-auto-instrumentation-python-image:
               ghcr.io/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/autoinstrumentation-python:0.39b0
API Version:  opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
Kind:         Instrumentation
Metadata:
 Creation Timestamp:  2023-07-28T03:42:12Z
 Generation:          1
 Resource Version:    3385
 UID:                 646661d5-a8fc-4b64-80b7-8587c9865f53
Spec:
...
 Exporter:
   Endpoint:  http://otel-collector-collector.opentelemetry.svc.cluster.local:4318
...
 Propagators:
   tracecontext
   baggage
 Python:
   Image:  ghcr.io/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/autoinstrumentation-python:0.39b0
   Resource Requirements:
     Limits:
       Cpu:     500m
       Memory:  32Mi
     Requests:
       Cpu:     50m
       Memory:  32Mi
 Resource:
 Sampler:
Events:  <none>
```

> ### Check the OpenTelemetry Operator Logs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Check the OpenTelemetry Operator logs
```

Check the OpenTelemetry Operator logs for errors by running this command:

```shell
kubectl logs -l app.kubernetes.io/name=opentelemetry-operator --container manager -n opentelemetry-operator-system --follow
```

The logs should not show any errors related to auto-instrumentation errors.

### Check deployment order

Make sure the deployment order is correct. The `Instrumentation` resource
must be deployed before deploying the corresponding `Deployment` resources
that are auto-instrumented.

Consider the following auto-instrumentation annotation snippet:

```yaml
annotations:

>   instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-python: 'true'

Reviewer 2: i would also note that a common mistake here is having your autoinst in something like the `opentelemetry` namespace but your applications are elsewhere. if that's the case, you need to use [the proper naming for the annotation](https://arc.net/l/quote/odtebkxy)

Author: Added another section to address this. Can you take a look @jaronoff97?

```

> The previous snippet tells the OpenTelemetry Operator to look for an

Author: ```suggestion
```

> `Instrumentation` resource in the pod’s namespace. It also tells the

Author: ```suggestion
```

removing per @tiffany76

> Operator to inject Python auto-instrumentation into the pod.

Reviewer: I think this paragraph can be deleted, since it repeats lines 98-100.

> Operator to inject Python auto-instrumentation into the pod.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Removing, per @tiffany76

When the pod starts up, the annotation tells the Operator to look for an
`Instrumentation` resource in the pod’s namespace, and to inject Python
auto-instrumentation into the pod. It adds an

> [init-container](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/init-containers/)
> to the application’s pod, called `opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation`, which is
> then used to injects the auto-instrumentation into the app container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[init-container](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/init-containers/)
called `opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation` to the application’s pod, which is
then used to inject the auto-instrumentation into the app container.
```

is deployed, the `init-container` can’t be created. This means that if the
`Deployment` resource is deployed before you deploy the `Instrumentation`
resource, the auto-instrumentation fails to initialize.

Check that the `opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation` `init-container` has started
up correctly (or has even started up at all), by running the following command:

```shell
kubectl get events -n <your_app_namespace>
```

Which should result in output that looks like the following example:

```text
53s         Normal   Created             pod/py-otel-server-7f54bf4cbc-p8wmj    Created container opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation
53s         Normal   Started             pod/py-otel-server-7f54bf4cbc-p8wmj    Started container opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation
```

If the output is missing `Created` or `Started` entries for
`opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation`, there might be an issue with
your auto-instrumentation configuration. This can be the result of any of the
following:

- The `Instrumentation` resource wasn’t installed or wasn’t installed
  properly.
- The `Instrumentation` resource was installed after the application was
  deployed.

> - There’s an error in the auto-instrumentation annotation, or the annotation in
>   the wrong spot. See the next section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- There’s an error in the auto-instrumentation annotation, or the annotation is in
  the wrong spot. See the next section.
```

correctly. Check for the following:

- Are you auto-instrumenting for the right language? For example, did you
  try to auto-instrument a Python application by adding a JavaScript
  auto-instrumentation annotation instead?
- Did you put the auto-instrumentation annotation in the right location? When
  you’re defining a `Deployment` resource, there are two locations where you could
  add annotations: `spec.metadata.annotations`, and
  `spec.template.metadata.annotations`. The auto-instrumentation annotation
  needs to be added to `spec.template.metadata.annotations`, otherwise it doesn't
  work.

### Check auto-instrumentation endpoint configuration

The `spec.exporter.endpoint` configuration in the `Instrumentation` resource
allows you to define the destination for your telemetry data. If you omit it, it
defaults to `http://localhost:4317`, which causes the data to be dropped.

If you’re sending out your telemetry to a [Collector](/docs/collector/),
the value of `spec.exporter.endpoint` must reference the name of your
Collector
[`Service`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/).

For example: `http://otel-collector.opentelemetry.svc.cluster.local:4318`.

> Where:
> 
> - `otel-collector` is the name of the OTel Collector Kubernetes
>   [`Service`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/)
> - In addition, if the Collector is running in a different namespace, you must
>   append `opentelemetry.svc.cluster.local` to the Collector’s service name,
>   where `opentelemetry` is the namespace in which the Collector resides (it can
>   be any namespace of your choosing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where `otel-collector` is the name of the OTel Collector Kubernetes [`Service`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/).

In addition, if the Collector is running in a different namespace, you must append `opentelemetry.svc.cluster.local` to the Collector’s service name, where `opentelemetry` is the namespace in which the Collector resides. It can be any namespace of your choosing.
```

---
title: Auto-instrumentation
---

> If you're using the [OpenTelemetry Operator](/docs/kubernetes/operator)'s
> [auto-instrumentation](/docs/kubernetes/operator/automatic) capability and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you're using the [OpenTelemetry Operator](/docs/kubernetes/operator)'s
capability to inject [auto-instrumentation](/docs/kubernetes/operator/automatic)  and
```

We might need to review the operator docs later for where "automatic instrumentation" is applicable and where we want to say "zero-code instrumentation", but for now I am ok with leaving it like that.

Author: I took a quick look at the [Operator's README on GitHub](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator?tab=readme-ov-file#opentelemetry-operator-for-kubernetes) and it still says "auto-instrumentation". I'm guessing that there was a recent shift to rename it to "zero-code instrumentation"?

> and you're not seeing any traces or metrics, then there are a few
> troubleshooting steps that you can take to help you understand what’s going on
> and to get things back on track.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and you're not seeing any traces or metrics, follow these
troubleshooting steps to understand what’s going on.
```

> ## Troubleshooting Steps

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Troubleshooting steps
```

> ### 1- Check installation status

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Check installation status
```

After installing the `Instrumentation` resource, make sure that it _actually_
installed correctly by running this command:

```shell
kubectl describe otelinst -n <namespace>
```

Where `<namespace>` is the namespace in which the `Instrumentation` resource is
deployed.

> Your output should look something like this:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Your output should look like this:
```

               ghcr.io/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/autoinstrumentation-java:1.26.0
             instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/default-auto-instrumentation-nodejs-image:
               ghcr.io/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/autoinstrumentation-nodejs:0.40.0
             instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/default-auto-instrumentation-python-image:
               ghcr.io/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/autoinstrumentation-python:0.39b0
API Version:  opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
Kind:         Instrumentation
Metadata:
 Creation Timestamp:  2023-07-28T03:42:12Z
 Generation:          1
 Resource Version:    3385
 UID:                 646661d5-a8fc-4b64-80b7-8587c9865f53
Spec:
...
 Exporter:
   Endpoint:  http://otel-collector-collector.opentelemetry.svc.cluster.local:4318
...
 Propagators:
   tracecontext
   baggage
 Python:
   Image:  ghcr.io/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/autoinstrumentation-python:0.39b0
   Resource Requirements:
     Limits:
       Cpu:     500m
       Memory:  32Mi
     Requests:
       Cpu:     50m
       Memory:  32Mi
 Resource:
 Sampler:
Events:  <none>
```

> ### 2- Check the OpenTelemetry Operator Logs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Check the OpenTelemetry Operator Logs
```

> Check the OpenTelemetry Operator logs for errors, by running this command:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Check the OpenTelemetry Operator logs for errors by running this command:
```

```shell
kubectl logs -l app.kubernetes.io/name=opentelemetry-operator --container manager -n opentelemetry-operator-system --follow
```

The logs should not show any errors related to auto-instrumentation errors.

> ### 3- Check deployment order

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Check deployment order
```

> Order matters. The `Instrumentation` resource must be deployed before deploying
> the corresponding `Deployment` resource(s) being auto-instrumented.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Make sure the deployment order is correct. The `Instrumentation` resource
must be deployed before deploying the corresponding `Deployment` resources
that are auto-instrumented.
```

Consider the following auto-instrumentation annotation snippet:

```yaml
annotations:
  instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-python: 'true'
```

> It tells the OpenTelemetry Operator to look for an `Instrumentation` resource in
> the pod’s namespace. It also tells the Operator to inject Python
> auto-instrumentation into the pod.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The previous snippet tells the OpenTelemetry Operator to look for an
`Instrumentation` resource in the pod’s namespace. It also tells the
Operator to inject Python auto-instrumentation into the pod.
```

When the pod starts up, the annotation tells the Operator to look for an
`Instrumentation` resource in the pod’s namespace, and to inject Python
auto-instrumentation into the pod. It adds an
[init-container](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/init-containers/)
to the application’s pod, called `opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation`, which is
then used to injects the auto-instrumentation into the app container.

> But if the `Instrumentation` resource isn’t present by the time the `Deployment`
> is deployed, the `init-container` can’t be created. This means that if the
> `Deployment` resource is deployed _before_ you deploy the `Instrumentation`
> resource, the auto-instrumentation will fail to initialize.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the `Instrumentation` resource isn’t present by the time the `Deployment`
is deployed, the `init-container` can’t be created. This means that if the
`Deployment` resource is deployed before you deploy the `Instrumentation`
resource, the auto-instrumentation fails to initialize.
```

Check that the `opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation` `init-container` has started
up correctly (or has even started up at all), by running the following command:

```shell
kubectl get events -n <your_app_namespace>
```

> Which should result in output that looks something like this:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Which should result in output that looks like the following example:
```

```text
53s         Normal   Created             pod/py-otel-server-7f54bf4cbc-p8wmj    Created container opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation
53s         Normal   Started             pod/py-otel-server-7f54bf4cbc-p8wmj    Started container opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation
```

> If the output is missing `Created` and/or `Started` entries for
> `opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation`, then it means that there is an issue with
> your auto-instrumentation configuration. This can be the result of any of the
> following:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the output is missing `Created` or `Started` entries for
`opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation`, there might be an issue with
your auto-instrumentation configuration. This can be the result of any of the
following:
```

> - The `Instrumentation` resource wasn’t installed (or wasn’t installed
>   properly).
> - The `Instrumentation` resource was installed _after_ the application was
>   deployed.
> - There’s an error in the auto-instrumentation annotation, or the annotation in
>   the wrong spot — see #4 below.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The `Instrumentation` resource wasn’t installed or wasn’t installed
  properly.
- The `Instrumentation` resource was installed after the application was
  deployed.
- There’s an error in the auto-instrumentation annotation, or the annotation in
  the wrong spot. See the next section.
```

You might also want to check the output of the events command for any errors, as
these might help point to your issue.

> ### 4- Check the auto-instrumentation configuration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Check the auto-instrumentation configuration
```

> You’ve added the auto-instrumentation annotation, but did you do it correctly?
> Here are a couple of things to check for:
> 
> - **Are you auto-instrumenting for the right language?** For example, did you
>   try to auto-instrument a Python application by adding a JavaScript
>   auto-instrumentation annotation instead?
> - **Did you put the auto-instrumentation annotation in the right spot?** When
>   you’re defining a `Deployment` resource, there are two spots where you could
>   add annotations: `spec.metadata.annotations`, and
>   `spec.template.metadata.annotations`. The auto-instrumentation annotation
>   needs to be added to `spec.template.metadata.annotations`, otherwise _it won’t
>   work_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The auto-instrumentation annotation might have not been added
correctly. Check for the following:

- Are you auto-instrumenting for the right language? For example, did you
  try to auto-instrument a Python application by adding a JavaScript
  auto-instrumentation annotation instead?
- Did you put the auto-instrumentation annotation in the right location? When
  you’re defining a `Deployment` resource, there are two locations where you could
  add annotations: `spec.metadata.annotations`, and
  `spec.template.metadata.annotations`. The auto-instrumentation annotation
  needs to be added to `spec.template.metadata.annotations`, otherwise it doesn't
  work.
```

> ### 5- Check auto-instrumentation endpoint configuration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Check auto-instrumentation endpoint configuration
```

The `spec.exporter.endpoint` configuration in the `Instrumentation` resource
allows you to define the destination for your telemetry data. If you omit it, it

> defaults to `http://localhost:4317`. Unfortunately, that won’t send your output
> anywhere useful.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
defaults to `http://localhost:4317`, which causes the data to be dropped.
```

Can we explain why?

> If you’re sending out your instrumentation to a [Collector](/docs/collector/),
> the value of `spec.exporter.endpoint` should reference the name of your
> Collector
> [`Service`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you’re sending out your telemetry to a [Collector](/docs/collector/),
the value of `spec.exporter.endpoint` must reference the name of your
Collector
[`Service`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/).
```

Spec:
...
 Exporter:
   Endpoint:  http://otel-collector-collector.opentelemetry.svc.cluster.local:4318
...
 Propagators:
   tracecontext
   baggage
 Python:
   Image:  ghcr.io/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/autoinstrumentation-python:0.39b0
   Resource Requirements:
     Limits:
       Cpu:     500m
       Memory:  32Mi
     Requests:
       Cpu:     50m
       Memory:  32Mi
 Resource:
 Sampler:
Events:  <none>
```

### Check the OpenTelemetry Operator logs

Check the OpenTelemetry Operator logs for errors by running this command:

```shell
kubectl logs -l app.kubernetes.io/name=opentelemetry-operator --container manager -n opentelemetry-operator-system --follow
```

The logs should not show any errors related to auto-instrumentation errors.

### Check deployment order

Make sure the deployment order is correct. The `Instrumentation` resource must
be deployed before deploying the corresponding `Deployment` resources that are
auto-instrumented.

Consider the following auto-instrumentation annotation snippet:

```yaml
annotations:
  instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-python: 'true'
```

When the pod starts up, the annotation tells the Operator to look for an

> `Instrumentation` resource in the pod’s namespace, and to inject Python

Reviewer 5: the instrumentation CR does not have to be in the pod namespace. There are a couple of possible values

```
The possible values for the annotation can be:

"true" - inject OpenTelemetryCollector resource from the namespace.
"sidecar-for-my-app" - name of OpenTelemetryCollector CR instance in the current namespace.
"my-other-namespace/my-instrumentation" - name and namespace of OpenTelemetryCollector CR instance in another namespace.
"false" - do not inject
```

Author: True, but I believe that in the example that I cite in [lines 87-99](https://github.com/avillela/opentelemetry.io/blob/dec09d83035244a9e956bff0ea77f5a6be442cae/content/en/docs/kubernetes/operator/troubleshooting/automatic.md?plain=1#L87-L99):

```yaml
annotations:
  instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-python: 'true'
```

 it would still look for the `Instrumentation` resource in the pod's namespace, would it not? It only looks for it in a different namespace if the annotation includes the namespace, like with

```yaml
annotations:
  instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-python: 'my-app-ns/my-instrumentation'
```

Is that not the case?

Author: Added more clarity [here](https://github.com/avillela/opentelemetry.io/blob/0b950a75b8d685359a2d3be6bc8b9699b7ee34d8/content/en/docs/kubernetes/operator/troubleshooting/automatic.md?plain=1#L279-L286)

auto-instrumentation into the pod. It adds an

> [init-container](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/init-containers/)

Reviewer 5: it might be helpful to show here how the pod spec looks like after injection with init container, volumes and configured env variables.

Author: Done!

`opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation`, there might be an issue with your
auto-instrumentation configuration. This can be the result of any of the
following:

- The `Instrumentation` resource wasn’t installed or wasn’t installed properly.
- The `Instrumentation` resource was installed after the application was
  deployed.
- There’s an error in the auto-instrumentation annotation, or the annotation is
  in the wrong spot. See the next section.

You might also want to check the output of the events command for any errors, as
these might help point to your issue.

### Check the auto-instrumentation annotation

Consider the following auto-instrumentation annotation snippet:

```yaml
annotations:
  instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-python: 'true'
```

If your `Deployment` resource is deployed to a namespace called `application`
and you have an `Instrumentation` resource called `my-instrumentation` which is
deployed to a namespace called `opentelemetry`, then the above annotation will
not work.

Instead, the annotation should be:

```yaml
annotations:
  instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/opentelemetry/inject-python: 'opentelemetry/my-instrumentation'
```

> Where `opentelemetry` is the namesapce of the `Instrumentation` resource, and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Where `opentelemetry` is the namespace of the `Instrumentation` resource, and
```
